  

 

Physical Layer Characteristics  

Bandwidth is the volume of information that can be sent over a connection in a measured amount of time – calculated in megabits per second (Mbps) 

 

Bandwidth Usages: Broadband 

Divides bandwidth into separate channels 

Example: Cable TV 

Baseband 

-uses all available frequency on a medium (cable) to transmit data reference clock to coordinate the transmissions by both sender and receiver. 

Example: Ethernet  

Multiplexing, muxing, is a way of sending multiple signals or streams of information over a communication link at the same time in the form of a single, complex signal. 

When the signal reaches its destination, a process called demultiplexing, demuxing, recovers the separate signals and outputs them to individual lines. 

Multiplexing is a method used by networks to consolidate multiple signals – digital or analog- into a single composite signal that is transported over a common medium, such as fiber optic cable or radio wave. 

 

Analog signal – any continuous signal representing some other quantity, I.e., “analogous to another quantity. E.g. In an analog audio signal, the instantaneous signal voltage varies continuously with the pressure of the sound waves. 

Multiplexing strategies  

Time-Division Multiplexing (TDM) - each session takes turns, using time slots, to share the medium between all users 

Statistical Time-Division Multiplexing (StatTDM) : the more efficient version of TDM, it dynamically allocates time slots on as as-needed basis instead of statically assigning  

Frequency-Division Multiplexing (FDM): Medum is divided into various channels based on frequencies and each session is transmitted over a different channel.  

Broadband 

 

 

Transmission Medium 

Twisted Pair Cable: 2 conductors (normally copper), each with a plastic insulation, twisted together to form a single media  

Most used due to reliable performance at low costs  

Only one of the two wires carries actual signal, the other being used as a ground reference 

The twists between wires are helpful in reducing noise (electro-magnetic interference) and crosstalk. 

Used in telephone lines to provide voice and data channels 

Types:  

Unshielded Twisted Pair (UTP)  

UTP is more common 

It costs less and it is easily available 

Used for LANs and telephone connections 

Consists of 2 or 4 pairs of twisted cables  

Cable with 2 pair uses RJ-11 connector (used in connecting telephone units- 6 pins) and the 4 pair cables use RJ-45 connector (used with Ethernet cables in computer networking – 8 pins) 

     Shielded Twisted Pair (STP)  

 has metal foil covering for each pair of insulator conductors 

Electromagnetic noise penetration is prevented by metal casing. Shielding also eliminates crosstalk 

Like UTP but has a mesh shielding that protects it from EMI which allows a higher transmission rate 

More expensive than coaxial and UTP 

 

Coaxial Cable: copper cables with better shielding than twisted pair cables--> transmitted signals may travel longer distances at higher speeds 

 

- the shield minimizes EMI and radio frequencies 

- it has 2 wires of copper 

- computer networks, cable television industry 

 

 

Optical Fiber Cable: not affected by EMI--> noise and distortion are very less 

- they carry communication signals using pulses of light generated by small lasers or light-emitting diodes (LEDs), where each pulse represents a bit 

OC (Optical Carrier) standard speed link- OC-n, where the link speed equals n x 51.8 

Standards are OC-1, OC-3, OC-12, OC-24, OC-48, OC-96, OC-192, OC-768 

                               - they consist of one or more strands of glass, each only slightly thicker than a human hair. The center of each strand is called the core, which provides the pathway for light to travel. The core is surrounded by a layer of glass called cladding that reflects light inward to avoid loss of signal and allows the light to pass through bends in the cable. No light escapes the glass core because of this reflective cladding 

Suitable for industrial and noisy areas  

 

 

Radio Frequencies  

 

 

 

 

Guided media: the waves are guided along a solid medium – fiber-optic cable, twisted-pair copper wire or coaxial cable. 

Unguided media: the waves propagate in the atmosphere and in outer space such as in wireless LAN or a digital satellite channel.  

Unshielded twisted pair UTP: used for computer networks within a building = LANs, data rates range from 10Mbps to 10 Gbps  

The data rates that can be achieved depend on the thickness of the wires and the distance between transmitter and receiver.  

 

Terrestrial Radio Channels  

They carry signals in the electromagnetic spectrum.  

No physical wire to be installed  

Can penetrate walls 

Provide connectivity to a mobile user 

Can potentially carry a signal over long distances 

They depend on the propagation environment and the distance over which a signal is to be carried 

Path loss and shadow fading – decrease the signal strength as the signal travels over a distance and around obstructing objects – multipath fading – due to signal reflection off interfering objects and interference – due to other transmissions and electromagnetic signals 

Three main categories:  

Very Short distance (up to 1 meter)- wireless headphones, keyboards 

Those that operate in local areas (10 m to a few 100 of m): wireless LAN technologies  

Wide Area (10s of Km): cellular access technologies use WAN 

 

Satellite Radio Channels  

A communication satellite uses 2 or more Earth-based microwave transmitters/receivers, known as ground stations. The satellite receives transmissions on one frequency band, regenerates the signal using a repeater and transmits the signal on another frequency.  

Two types:  

Geostationary satellites: permanently on the same spot at 36 K kilometers above Earth’s surface. This causes a propagation delay of up to 280 milliseconds. 

LEO (low-earth orbiting) satellites: placed much closer to Earth and do not remain permanently above one spot on Earth. 

 

The Network Core  

 

Packet Switching  

End systems exchange messages with each other. Messages can contain a control function (“Hi”) or data (email message, JPEG, or an MP3 audio file). 

Messages are broken into smaller chunks to be sent from one end system to a destination end system = packets  

Each packet travels through communication links and packet switches (routers and link-layer switches) 

Time to transmit: L/R  

Store-and-Forward Transmission  

D end-to-end = N * L/R  

Each packet switch (router) has an output buffer (output queue) which stores packets that the router is about to send into that link. 

Packet loss happens when the buffer space is full - either the arriving packet or one of the already-queued packets will be dropped.  

 

 

 

 

 

Packet forwarding- via route tables 

When an end system wants to send a message to another end system, the source includes the destination’s IP address in the packet’s header. 

Circuit Switching  

The resources needed along a path are not reserved, a session’s messages use the resources on demand which causes queueing for access to a communication link 

Analogy: a restaurant that does not require reservations. We might find a seat, or we might have to wait for one. 

E.g.: traditional telephone networks 

Multiplexing in Circuit-Switched Networks  

A circuit in a link is implemented with either frequency-division multiplexing (FDM) or time-division multiplexing (TDM) 

FDM – the frequency spectrum of a link is divided up among the connections established across the link. I.e.: the link dedicates a frequency band to each connection for the duration of the connection. The frequency band has a width of 4k Hz (4000 hertz, or 4000 cycles per second) for telephone networks. 

FM radio stations also use FDM to share the frequency spectrum between 88 MHz and 108 MHz, with each station being allocated a specific frequency band.  

Circuit switching pre-allocates use of the transmission link regardless of demand, with allocated but unneeded link time going unused.  

Packet switching allocates link use on demand. Link transmission capacity will be shared on a packet-by-packet basis only among those users who have packets to transmit over the link. 

 

Network of networks  

The ISPs must be connected between themselves  
